The area of a circle is \pi r^2.
Here, Area is a "function" of r.
Input any r to this function and it gives you the area.

Functions can be thought of as machines. Give them inputs and they give you outputs.
Functions do have restrictions on what they can give you. (The vertical line test)

Domain and range. (Brief. More later)

The book mentions the 4 Ways to represent a function.
With words , By explicit formula (Algebraically) , With a graph , With a table (Numerically)
Depending on what we want to do, one representation might be better than the others

Graphing.
To graph functions with one input and one output (2d functions) we first draw a 2d coordinate system.
Commonly, the horizontal axis is where choose the inputs from. (The r axis in A = \pi r^2)
For that r (the input) calculate area (the output) and plot the point (r,A).
As you choose different input, you might get different output.

More about domains and how to find them

Piecewise functions

Symmetry

How graphs are shifted and stretched

Composition and their domains.




If you draw a circle of radius r its area would be pi r squared. While animating this circle, I can set the value of r to be 1, 5 or even -10, this formula always gives you the area of the corresponding circle. Even though a physical radius is always positive, here, you can see I do get a circle if r is -10. In fact, the area is exactly the same as that of a circle with radius 10. Anyway, Here, area can be thought of as a "function" of r. With proper notation, we can write it like this: [A(r) = pi r^2] A of r is equal to pi r squared. This function takes radius as its input and gives you the area as its output. [Pause] You can think of any function like a machine. The machine takes some inputs and gives out an output. Now, Before talking about the domain and range of functions, Let's look at another way to understand functions, Graphs. Again, a function takes inputs and gives outputs, and one of the best ways to see this is by plotting them. Let’s go back to our circle example: the area of a circle as a function of its radius. If we plot the radius on the horizontal axis and the area on the vertical axis, we get this curve. (How we get this graph is first we choose any radius, any r in the horizontal axis. Sayy 0.5. That's our input. And we calculate the output of this area function for that r. Now plot the point (r,A(r)). Now you can imagine silding the input left and right and also plotting the point (r,A(r)). And that gives you the graph of the function.) Any point on this curve tells you this: for this r, this radius, this height is the A of r or the area of the circle with that radius. And that's true for any r-value in this graph. I mean that's how we made this graph. So, graphs help us visualize how functions behave. But not everything we draw is necessarily a function. A key rule of functions is that <write> no input can have more than one output </write>. Let's think what this means while looking at a graph. On this graph, as usual, the horizontal axis represents the inputs and the vertical axis represents the outputs. If we take 4 as our example input, there is only 1 y or 1 output for that input. But for a graph to be a graph of a function, this should be true for all inputs. Which we can see is clearly not true if the input is -1.5. There are 3 y values or 3 outputs for that input. So this graph is not graph of a function. But if we look back at our parabola, it is a graph of a function. Because for all r, it only gives you one area. This is called the vertical line test. <Animation of vertical line rejecting some graphs> If you can find any vertical line that goes through 2 or more points of the same graph, that graph is not the graph of a function. The vertical line passing through multiple points is the same thing as the function giving multiple outputs for the same inputs which makes it not a function. Now, lets talk about something just as important, domain and range of functions. Domain is the set of all numbers that a function is allowed to take as input. Let me give you an example. Say, f of x is equal to 3 x [f(x) = 3x]. And to the left is the graph of this function. But what is the domain of this function? What numbers is this function allowed to take as is inputs? Or simply, what numbers can we plug into x? Well, since we can multiply any real number by 3, that means the function can take any real number as input. So, the domain of this function is all real numbers. This symbol means the set of all real numbers. And in interval notation, we can write same thing like this: negative infinity to infinity with the round brackets [(-\infty , \infty)] [pause] But this might not be for all functions. We could have also explicitly restricted the domain for the same function while we were defining it. We could have said: f of x is equal to 3 x; but only when x is between -2 and 1, including the end points. By defining it like that, we've restricted the domain to be only this interval. -2 to 1; with square brackets. But domain restrictions can happen in other ways too. Look at this function: g of x is equal to square root of x [g(x) = \sqrt{x}] And just looking at the equation you can quickly see that you can not plug in negative numbers for x. The square root of a negative number is not a real number. But you can plug in 0 and all positive numbers for x. So, the domain would be the interval from 0 to infinity including 0. And of course you can explicitly set even more restrictions in its domain. And that would also change the graph of the function. How about this function? [f(x) = \sqrt{4-x}] What numbers can you plug in for x in this case? If you look at the graph, it's pretty obvious. But you should also be able to do this by only looking at the equation. so, here, all we know is Whatever you plug in for x, the thing inside the square root can not be negative. Meaning it has to be 0 or more. So we can write this [4-x \geq 0] and if you add x on both sides you get this: [4 \geq x] Which means x can be less or equal to 4. Now we know what numbers we can plug into the function; all numbers less or equal to 4. So, the domain is the interval from negative infinity upto and including 4. [Start Fading out] Now we know that finding domain is just asking what numbers we can plug into the function and still get a meaningful output. Now you know that, can you find the domain of this function? [f(x) = sqrt{16 - x^2}] Again, asking the same question, What numbers can we plug in for x? Or, what values of x makes the stuff inside the square root positive or 0? We can start with this inequality: 16 - x squared is greater or equal to 0 [16-x^2 \geq 0] From this, we can say, 16 is greater or equal to x squared. Or, x^2 is less or equal to 16. From this, we can't simply take the square root on both sides. What we can do is find out when x squared is EQUAL to 16. And that is at x equals 4 and -4. And for x^2 to be less or equal to 16, x has to be between -4 and 4 including both. Picking anything outside this interval makes x squared more than 16. This is more apparent if you graph y=x^2. We're asking for what x's is y less or equal to 16. At these points y or x squared is equal to 16. And in this region, y less or equal to 16. Where, x is between -4 and 4. And that interval is the domain of our function. Which was so obvious from the beginning because of the graph right. Only these x's seem to have an output. So that interval is the domain. And this is why you should also be able to graph a function. They show the behabior of a function, they show what’s happening and equation alone might miss that part of the function. So, let's do another: [f(x) = \frac{1}{sqrt{x^2 - 1}}] And at this point, feel free to pause and do it yourself. And for this one, i'm only going to play the animation and not explain it. So, here are the steps to solve it. [Animation playing] Now we know that domain is the set of numbers that a function can take as input, range is the set of numbers that a function can give as output. Let's look at an example: [f(x) = 2x-1] f of x is equal to 2 x - 1. And here's the graph. And We know that the domain of this function is all real numbers. So, the input, x, can be any real number. And that times 2 also gives you all real numbers. And you might think is that actually true? I mean if x could only be the natural numbers, 2 times that would only give you the even numbers. But with all real numbers, there is always some real number that time 2 will give you whatever real number you want. So it is safe to say that all real numbers times 2 is also all real numbers. And all real numbers - 1 is also all real numbers. You can do the a similar argument. So, the range of this function, the set of all of numbers that this function can output is also all real numbers. What about this function though. [f(x) = x^2-1]. Again, we know that its domain is all real numbers. So, x can be anything. But, if you square any real number, you only get a positive real number or a zero if x was 0. But no negatives. But the minus 1 allows this function to give a minimum output of -1 when x is 0. So the range is the interval from -1 to infinity. Which agrees with the graph. Alright, now, let's see if you can find the range of this function: [f(x)=sqrt{16-x^2}] Here is the graph it should look familiar. We have already looked at this function. So, you can see the range has to be 0 to 4. But let's work it out. First, we know that x squared can only be 0 or positive. Meaning negative x squared gives you 0 or negative numbers. So, 16 - x squared will be all real numbers with a maximum of 16. Let me rescale the graph so y equals 16 is visible. So 16 - x squared gives you 16 and all numbers less than 16. But, square root can only take positive real numbers inside it. So we only have this interval inside the square root. [0-16] and taking the square root of numbers in this interval gives you this interval. So, the range of this function is the interval from 0 to 4.
